
## 4.19 Primitive character I/O

See [section 4.2](chars.html#sec:4.2) for an overview of supported character representations.

\[ISO\]**nl**  
Write a newline character to the current output stream. On Unix systems [nl/0](chario.html#nl/0) is equivalent to `put(10)`.

\[ISO\]**nl**(`+Stream`)  
Write a newline to `Stream`.

**put**(`+Char`)  
Write `Char` to the current output stream. `Char` is either an integer expression evaluating to a character code or an atom of one character. Deprecated. New code should use [put_char/1](chario.html#put_char/1) or [put_code/1](chario.html#put_code/1).

**put**(`+Stream, +Char`)  
Write `Char` to `Stream`. See [put/1](chario.html#put/1) for details.

\[ISO\]**put_byte**(`+Byte`)  
Write a single byte to the output. `Byte` must be an integer between 0 and 255.

\[ISO\]**put_byte**(`+Stream, +Byte`)  
Write a single byte to `Stream`. `Byte` must be an integer between 0 and 255.

\[ISO\]**put_char**(`+Char`)  
Write a character to the current output, obeying the encoding defined for the current output stream. Note that this may raise an exception if the encoding of the output stream cannot represent `Char`.

\[ISO\]**put_char**(`+Stream, +Char`)  
Write a character to `Stream`, obeying the encoding defined for `Stream`. Note that this may raise an exception if the encoding of `Stream` cannot represent `Char`.

\[ISO\]**put_code**(`+Code`)  
Similar to [put_char/1](chario.html#put_char/1), but using a *character code*. `Code` is a non-negative integer. Note that this may raise an exception if the encoding of the output stream cannot represent `Code`.

\[ISO\]**put_code**(`+Stream, +Code`)  
Same as [put_code/1](chario.html#put_code/1) but directing `Code` to `Stream`.

**tab**(`+Amount`)  
Write `Amount` spaces on the current output stream. `Amount` should be an expression that evaluates to a positive integer (see [section 4.27](arith.html#sec:4.27)).

**tab**(`+Stream, +Amount`)  
Write `Amount` spaces to `Stream`.

\[ISO\]**flush_output**  
Flush pending output on current output stream. [flush_output/0](chario.html#flush_output/0) is automatically generated by [read/1](termrw.html#read/1) and derivatives if the current input stream is `user` and the cursor is not at the left margin.

\[ISO\]**flush_output**(`+Stream`)  
Flush output on the specified stream. The stream must be open for writing.

**ttyflush**  
Flush pending output on stream `user`. See also [flush_output/\[0,1\]](chario.html#flush_output/0).

\[ISO\]**get_byte**(`-Byte`)  
Read the current input stream and unify the next byte with `Byte` (an integer between 0 and 255). `Byte` is unified with -1 on end of file.

\[ISO\]**get_byte**(`+Stream, -Byte`)  
Read the next byte from `Stream` and unify `Byte` with an integer between 0 and 255.

\[ISO\]**get_code**(`-Code`)  
Read the current input stream and unify `Code` with the character code of the next character. `Code` is unified with -1 on end of file. See also [get_char/1](chario.html#get_char/1).

\[ISO\]**get_code**(`+Stream, -Code`)  
Read the next character code from `Stream`.

\[ISO\]**get_char**(`-Char`)  
Read the current input stream and unify `Char` with the next character as a one-character atom. See also [atom_chars/2](manipatom.html#atom_chars/2). On end-of-file, `Char` is unified to the atom `end_of_file`.

\[ISO\]**get_char**(`+Stream, -Char`)  
Unify `Char` with the next character from `Stream` as a one-character atom. See also [get_char/2](chario.html#get_char/2), [get_byte/2](chario.html#get_byte/2) and [get_code/2](chario.html#get_code/2).

\[deprecated\]**get0**(`-Char`)  
Edinburgh version of the ISO [get_code/1](chario.html#get_code/1) predicate. Note that Edinburgh Prolog didn't support wide characters and therefore technically speaking [get0/1](chario.html#get0/1) should have been mapped to [get_byte/1](chario.html#get_byte/1). The intention of [get0/1](chario.html#get0/1), however, is to read character codes.

\[deprecated\]**get0**(`+Stream, -Char`)  
Edinburgh version of the ISO [get_code/2](chario.html#get_code/2) predicate. See also [get0/1](chario.html#get0/1).

\[deprecated\]**get**(`-Char`)  
Read the current input stream and unify the next non-blank character with `Char`. `Char` is unified with -1 on end of file. The predicate [get/1](chario.html#get/1) operates on character *codes*. See also [get0/1](chario.html#get0/1).

\[deprecated\]**get**(`+Stream, -Char`)  
Read the next non-blank character from `Stream`. See also [get/1](chario.html#get/1), [get0/1](chario.html#get0/1) and [get0/2](chario.html#get0/2).

\[ISO\]**peek_byte**(`-Byte`)  
\[ISO\]**peek_byte**(`+Stream, -Byte`)  
\[ISO\]**peek_code**(`-Code`)  
\[ISO\]**peek_code**(`+Stream, -Code`)  
\[ISO\]**peek_char**(`-Char`)  
\[ISO\]**peek_char**(`+Stream, -Char`)  
Read the next byte/code/char from the input without removing it. These predicates do not modify the stream's position or end-of-file status. These predicates require a buffered stream (see [set_stream/2](IO.html#set_stream/2)) and raise a permission error if the stream is unbuffered or the buffer is too small to hold the longest multi-byte sequence that might need to be buffered.

**peek_string**(`+Stream, +Len, -String`)  
Read the next `Len` characters (if the stream is a text stream) or bytes (if the stream is binary) from Stream without removing the data. If `Len` is larger that the stream buffer size, the buffer size is increased to `Len`. `String` can be shorter than `Len` if the stream contains less data. This predicate is intended to guess the content type of data read from non-repositionable streams.

**skip**(`+Code`)  
Read the input until `Code` or the end of the file is encountered. A subsequent call to [get_code/1](chario.html#get_code/1) will read the first character after `Code`.

**skip**(`+Stream, +Code`)  
Skip input (as [skip/1](chario.html#skip/1)) on `Stream`.

**get_single_char**(`-Code`)  
Get a single character from input stream‘user’(regardless of the current input stream). Unlike [get_code/1](chario.html#get_code/1), this predicate does not wait for a return. The character is not echoed to the user's terminal. This predicate is meant for keyboard menu selection, etc. If SWI-Prolog was started with the **--no-tty** option this predicate reads an entire line of input and returns the first non-blank character on this line, or the character code of the newline (10) if the entire line consisted of blank characters. See also [with_tty_raw/1](chario.html#with_tty_raw/1).

**with_tty_raw**(`:Goal`)  
Run goal with the user input and output streams set in *raw mode*, which implies the terminal makes the input available immediately instead of line-by-line and input that is read is not echoed. As a consequence, line editing does not work. See also [get_single_char/1](chario.html#get_single_char/1).

\[ISO\]**at_end_of_stream**  
Succeeds after the last character of the current input stream has been read. Also succeeds if there is no valid current input stream.

\[ISO\]**at_end_of_stream**(`+Stream`)  
Succeeds after the last character of the named stream is read, or `Stream` is not a valid input stream. The end-of-stream test is only available on buffered input streams (unbuffered input streams are rarely used; see [open/4](IO.html#open/4)).

**set_end_of_stream**(`+Stream`)  
Set the size of the file opened as `Stream` to the current file position. This is typically used in combination with the open-mode `update`.

**copy_stream_data**(`+StreamIn, +StreamOut, +Len`)  
Copy `Len` codes from `StreamIn` to `StreamOut`. Note that the copy is done using the semantics of [get_code/2](chario.html#get_code/2) and [put_code/2](chario.html#put_code/2), taking care of possibly recoding that needs to take place between two text files. See [section 2.18.1](widechars.html#sec:2.18.1).

**copy_stream_data**(`+StreamIn, +StreamOut`)  
Copy all (remaining) data from `StreamIn` to `StreamOut`.

\[det\]**fill_buffer**(`+Stream`)  
Fill the `Stream`’s input buffer. Subsequent calls try to read more input until the buffer is completely filled. This predicate is used together with [read_pending_codes/3](chario.html#read_pending_codes/3) to process input with minimal buffering.

**read_pending_codes**(`+StreamIn, -Codes, ?Tail`)  
Read input pending in the input buffer of `StreamIn` and return it in the difference list `Codes`-`Tail`. That is, the available characters codes are used to create the list `Codes` ending in the tail `Tail`. On encountering end-of-file, both `Codes` and `Tail` are unified with the empty list (`[]`).

This predicate is intended for efficient unbuffered copying and filtering of input coming from network connections or devices. It also enables the library `library(pure_input)`, which processes input from files and streams using a DCG.

The following code fragment realises efficient non-blocking copying of data from an input to an output stream. The [at_end_of_stream/1](chario.html#at_end_of_stream/1) call checks for end-of-stream and fills the input buffer. Note that the use of a [get_code/2](chario.html#get_code/2) and [put_code/2](chario.html#put_code/2) based loop requires a [flush_output/1](chario.html#flush_output/1) call after *each* [put_code/2](chario.html#put_code/2). The [copy_stream_data/2](chario.html#copy_stream_data/2) does not allow for inspection of the copied data and suffers from the same buffering issues.

``` code
copy(In, Out) :-
        repeat,
            fill_buffer(In),
            read_pending_codes(In, Chars, Tail),
            \+ \+ ( Tail = [],
                    format(Out, '~s', [Chars]),
                    flush_output(Out)
                  ),
            (   Tail == []
            ->  !
            ;   fail
            ).
```

**read_pending_chars**(`+StreamIn, -Chars, ?Tail`)  
As [read_pending_codes/3](chario.html#read_pending_codes/3), but returns a difference list of one-character atoms.
