
## 4.39 Debugging and Tracing Programs

This section is a reference to the debugger interaction predicates. A more use-oriented overview of the debugger is in [section 2.10](debugoverview.html#sec:2.10).

If you have installed XPCE, you can use the graphical front-end of the tracer. This front-end is installed using the predicate [guitracer/0](guitracer.html#guitracer/0).

**trace**  
Start the tracer. [trace/0](debugger.html#trace/0) itself cannot be seen in the tracer. Note that the Prolog top level treats [trace/0](debugger.html#trace/0) special; it means‘trace the next goal’.

**tracing**  
True if the tracer is currently switched on. [tracing/0](debugger.html#tracing/0) itself cannot be seen in the tracer.

**notrace**  
Stop the tracer. [notrace/0](debugger.html#notrace/0) itself cannot be seen in the tracer.

**notrace**(`:Goal`)  
Call `Goal`, but suspend the debugger while `Goal` is executing. The current implementation cuts the choice points of `Goal` after successful completion. See [once/1](metacall.html#once/1). Later implementations may have the same semantics as [call/1](metacall.html#call/1).

**debug**  
Start debugger. In debug mode, Prolog stops at spy and break points, disables last-call optimisation and aggressive destruction of choice points to make debugging information accessible. Implemented by the Prolog flag [debug](flags.html#flag:debug).

Note that the `min_free` parameter of all stacks is enlarged to 8 K cells if debugging is switched off in order to avoid excessive GC. GC complicates tracing because it renames the *\_\<`NNN`\>* variables and replaces unreachable variables with the atom `<garbage_collected>`. Calling [nodebug/0](debugger.html#nodebug/0) does *not* reset the initial free-margin because several parts of the top level and debugger disable debugging of system code regions. See also [set_prolog_stack/2](memory.html#set_prolog_stack/2).

**nodebug**  
Stop debugger. Implemented by the Prolog flag [debug](flags.html#flag:debug). See also [debug/0](debugger.html#debug/0).

**debugging**  
Print debug status and spy points on current output stream. See also the Prolog flag [debug](flags.html#flag:debug).

**spy**(`+Pred`)  
Put a spy point on all predicates meeting the predicate specification `Pred`. See [section A.24](listing.html#sec:A.24).

**nospy**(`+Pred`)  
Remove spy point from all predicates meeting the predicate specification `Pred`.

**nospyall**  
Remove all spy points from the entire program.

**leash**(`?Ports`)  
Set/query leashing (ports which allow for user interaction). `Ports` is one of `+Name`, `-Name`, `?Name` or a list of these. `+Name` enables leashing on that port, `-Name` disables it and `?Name` succeeds or fails according to the current setting. Recognised ports are `call`, `redo`, `exit`, `fail` and `unify`. The special shorthand `all` refers to all ports, `full` refers to all ports except for the unify port (default). `half` refers to the `call`, `redo` and `fail` port.

**visible**(`+Ports`)  
Set the ports shown by the debugger. See [leash/1](debugger.html#leash/1) for a description of the `Ports` specification. Default is `full`.

**unknown**(`-Old, +New`)  
Edinburgh-Prolog compatibility predicate, interfacing to the ISO Prolog flag [unknown](flags.html#flag:unknown). Values are `trace` (meaning `error`) and `fail`. If the [unknown](flags.html#flag:unknown) flag is set to `warning`, [unknown/2](debugger.html#unknown/2) reports the value as `trace`.

**style_check**(`+Spec`)  
Modify/query style checking options. `Spec` is one of the terms below or a list of these.

- \+`Style` enables a style check
- \-`Style` disables a style check
- ?(`Style`) queries a style check (note the brackets). If `Style` is unbound, all active style check options are returned on backtracking.

Loading a file using [load_files/2](consulting.html#load_files/2) or one of its derived predicates reset the style checking options to their value before loading the file, scoping the option to the remainder of the file and all files loaded *after* changing the style checking.

**singleton**(`true`)  
The predicate [read_clause/3](termrw.html#read_clause/3) (used by the compiler to read source code) warns on variables appearing only once in a term (clause) which have a name not starting with an underscore. See [section 2.15.1.10](syntax.html#sec:2.15.1.10) for details on variable handling and warnings.

**no_effect**(`true`)  
This warning is generated by the compiler for BIPs (built-in predicates) that are inlined by the compiler and for which the compiler can prove that they are meaningless. An example is using [==/2](compare.html#==/2) against a not-yet-initialised variable as illustrated in the example below. This comparison is always `false`.

``` code
always_false(X) :-
        X == Y,
        write(Y).
```

**var_branches**(`false`)  
Verifies that if a variable is introduced in a branch and used *after* the branch, it is introduced in all branches. This code aims at bugs following the skeleton below, where `p(Next)` may be called with `Next` unbound.

``` code
p(Arg) :-
        (  Cond
        -> Next = value1
        ;  true
        ),
        p(Next).
```

If a variable `V` is intended to be left unbound, one can use `V=_`. This construct is removed by the compiler and thus has no implications for the performance of your program.

This check was suggested together with *semantic* singleton checking. The SWI-Prolog libraries contain about a hundred clauses that are triggered by this style check. Unlike semantic singleton analysis, only a tiny fraction of these clauses proofed faulty. In most cases, the branches failing to bind the variable fail or raise an exception or the caller handles the case where the variable is unbound. The status of this style check is unclear. It might be removed in the future or it might be enhanced with a deeper analysis to be more precise.

**discontiguous**(`true`)  
Warn if the clauses for a predicate are not together in the same source file. It is advised to disable the warning for discontiguous predicates using the [discontiguous/1](dynamic.html#discontiguous/1) directive.

**charset**(`false`)  
Warn on atoms and variable names holding non-ASCII characters that are not quoted. See also [section 2.15.1.1](syntax.html#sec:2.15.1.1).
