
## 14.1 Deployment options

There are several ways to make a Prolog application available to your users. By far the easiest way is to require the user to install SWI-Prolog and deliver the application as a directory holding source files, other resources the application may need and a *Prolog Script* file that provides the executable. See [section 2.11.1.1](compilation.html#sec:2.11.1.1). The two-step installation may be slightly less convenient for the end user, but enables the end-user to conveniently run your program on a different operating system or architecture. This mechanism is obviously not suitable if you want to keep the source of your program secret.

Another solution is to use *saved states*, the main topic of this chapter, together with the installed development system and disable *autoloading* requirements into the state using **--no-autoload** or the `autoload(false)` option of [qsave_program/2](saved-states.html#qsave_program/2). This allows creating the application as a single file, while avoiding the need to ensure that the state is self-contained. For large programs this technique typically reduces startup time by an order of magnitude. This mechanism is particularly suitable for in-house and cloud deployment. It provides some protection against inspecting the source. See [section 14.6](protect-code.html#sec:14.6) for details.

The final solution is to make sure all required resources are present in the saved state. In this case the state may be added to the *emulator* and the application consists of the emulator with state and the shared objects/DLLs required to make the emulator work. If the emulator can be statically linked for the target platform this creates a single file executable that does not require SWI-Prolog installed on the target computer.
