
## 4.10 Exception handling

The predicates [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) and [throw/1](exception.html#throw/1) provide ISO compliant raising and catching of exceptions.

\[ISO\]**catch**(`:Goal, +Catcher, :Recover`)  
Behaves as [call/1](metacall.html#call/1) if no exception is raised when executing `Goal`. If an exception is raised using [throw/1](exception.html#throw/1) while `Goal` executes, and the `Goal` is the innermost goal for which `Catcher` unifies with the argument of [throw/1](exception.html#throw/1), all choice points generated by `Goal` are cut, the system backtracks to the start of [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) while preserving the thrown exception term, and `Recover` is called as in [call/1](metacall.html#call/1).

As of version 9.3.13, constraints (attributed variables) in `Catcher` are respected. If evaluating the constraint raises an exception, the most urgent exception is preserved (see [section 4.10.2](exception.html#sec:4.10.2)) and searching for a matching [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) call is continued. If both exceptions are equally urgent, the exception raised by the constraint evaluation is preserved.

The overhead of calling a goal through [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) is comparable to [call/1](metacall.html#call/1). Recovery from an exception is much slower, especially if the exception term is large due to the copying thereof or is decorated with a stack trace using, e.g., the library `library(prolog_stack)` based on the prolog_exception_hook/5 hook predicate to rewrite exceptions.

\[ISO\]**throw**(`+Exception`)  
Raise an exception. The system looks for the innermost [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) ancestor for which `Exception` unifies with the `Catcher` argument of the [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) call. See [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) for details.

ISO demands that [throw/1](exception.html#throw/1) make a copy of `Exception`, walk up the stack to a [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) call, backtrack and try to unify the copy of `Exception` with `Catcher`. SWI-Prolog delays backtracking until it actually finds a matching [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) goal. The advantage is that we can start the debugger at the first possible location while preserving the entire exception context if there is no matching [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) goal. This approach can lead to different behaviour if `Goal` and `Catcher` of [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) call shared variables. We assume this to be highly unlikely and could not think of a scenario where this is useful.^(82I'd like to acknowledge Bart Demoen for his clarifications on these matters.)

In addition to explicit calls to [throw/1](exception.html#throw/1), many built-in predicates throw exceptions directly from C. If the `Exception` term cannot be copied due to lack of stack space, the following actions are tried in order:

1.  If the exception is of the form `error(Formal, ImplementationDefined)`, try to raise the exception without the `ImplementationDefined` part.
2.  Try to raise `error(``resource_error(stack)``, global)`.
3.  Abort (see [abort/0](toplevel.html#abort/0)).

If an exception is raised in a call-back from C (see [chapter 12](foreign.html#sec:12)) and not caught in the same call-back, [PL_next_solution()](foreigninclude.html#PL_next_solution()) fails and the exception context can be retrieved using [PL_exception()](foreigninclude.html#PL_exception()).

**catch_with_backtrace**(`:Goal, +Catcher, :Recover`)  
As [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3), but if library `library(prolog_stack)` is loaded and an exception of the shape `error(Format, Context)` is raised `Context` is extended with a backtrace. To catch an error and print its message including a backtrace, use the following template:

``` code
:- use_module(library(prolog_stack)).

    ...,
    catch_with_backtrace(Goal, Error,
                         print_message(error, Error)),
    ...,
```

This is good practice for a *catch-all* wrapper around an application. See also [main/0](main.html#main/0) from library `library(main)`.

### 4.10.1 Unwind exceptions

Starting with SWI-Prolog 9.3.13, SWI-Prolog introduces a new class of reserved exceptions. An exception of the shape `unwind(Term)` is handled special by [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) and friends. Rather than simply calling the `Recover` goal (third argument), [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) acts as if called as

``` code
    catch(Goal, Ball, call_cleanup(once(Recover), throw(Ball)))
```

The above implies that cleanup that may be required on exceptions should use [call_cleanup/2](metacall.html#call_cleanup/2) (or one of its variations) or should perform the cleanup in the `Recover` goal. For example, the following does **not properly cleanup after an exception**:

``` code
    (   catch(Goal, Error, true)
    ->  (   var(Error)
        ->  <no exception>
        ;   <cleanup>      % NOT called on throw(unwind(...))
            ...
```

This implies that, unless the user ensures `Recover` does not terminate, the exception will unwind the entire Prolog stack. While foreign code that catches these exceptions should propagate them to the parent environment, we cannot enforce this behaviour.

Currently, this mechanism defines these values for `Term`:

**abort**  
Abort the current Prolog thread. This exception is raised by [abort/0](toplevel.html#abort/0). Previous versions raised `'$aborted'` using the same *unwind* semantics.

**halt**(`Status`)  
In the standard setup, if `unwind(``halt(Status)``)` is raised in the `main` thread, this system halts with exit code `Status`

**thread_exit**(`ExitValue`)  
This exception is raised by [thread_exit/1](threadcreate.html#thread_exit/1). See this predicate for details.

### 4.10.2 Urgency of exceptions

Under some conditions an exception may be raised as a result of handling another exception. Below are some of the scenarios:

- The predicate [setup_call_cleanup/3](metacall.html#setup_call_cleanup/3) calls the cleanup handler as a result of an exception and the cleanup handler raises an exception itself. In this case the most *urgent* exception is propagated into the environment.
- Raising an exception fails due to lack of resources, e.g., lack of stack space to store the exception. In this case a resource exception is raised. If that too fails the system tries to raise a resource exception without (stack) context. If that fails it will raise the exception `unwind(abort)`, also raised by [abort/0](toplevel.html#abort/0).
- Certain *callback* operations raise an exception while processing another exception or a previous callback already raised an exception before there was an opportunity to process the exception. The most notable *callback* subject to this issue are prolog_event_hook/1 (supporting e.g., the graphical debugger), prolog_exception_hook/5 (rewriting exceptions, e.g., by adding context) and [print_message/2](printmsg.html#print_message/2) when called from the core facilities such as the internal debugger. As with [setup_call_cleanup/3](metacall.html#setup_call_cleanup/3), the most *urgent* exception is preserved.

If the most urgent exceptions needs to be preserved, the following exception ordering is respected, preserving the topmost matching error.

1.  `unwind(halt(_))` ([halt/1](toplevel.html#halt/1))
2.  `unwind(thread_exit(_))` ([thread_exit/1](threadcreate.html#thread_exit/1))
3.  `unwind(abort)` ([abort/0](toplevel.html#abort/0))
4.  `time_limit_exceeded` (call_with_time_limit/2)
5.  `error(``resource_error(Resource)``, Context)`
6.  `error(Formal, Context)`
7.  All other exceptions

**Note** The above resolution is not described in the ISO standard. This is not needed either because ISO does not specify [setup_call_cleanup/3](metacall.html#setup_call_cleanup/3) and does not deal with environment management issues such as (debugger) callbacks. Neither does it define [abort/0](toplevel.html#abort/0) or timeout handling. Notably [abort/0](toplevel.html#abort/0) and timeout are non-logical control structures. They are implemented on top of exceptions as they need to unwind the stack, destroy choice points and call cleanup handlers in the same way. However, the pending exception should not be replaced by another one before the intended handler is reached. The abort exception cannot be caught, something which is achieved by wrapping the *cleanup handler* of [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) into `call_cleanup(Handler, abort)`.

### 4.10.3 Debugging and exceptions

Before the introduction of exceptions in SWI-Prolog a runtime error was handled by printing an error message, after which the predicate failed. If the Prolog flag [debug_on_error](flags.html#flag:debug_on_error) was in effect (default), the tracer was switched on. The combination of the error message and trace information is generally sufficient to locate the error.

With exception handling, things are different. A programmer may wish to trap an exception using [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) to avoid it reaching the user. If the exception is not handled by user code, the interactive top level will trap it to prevent termination.

If we do not take special precautions, the context information associated with an unexpected exception (i.e., a programming error) is lost. Therefore, if an exception is raised which is not caught using [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) and the top level is running, the error will be printed, and the system will enter trace mode.

If the system is in a non-interactive call-back from foreign code and there is no [catch/3](exception.html#catch/3) active in the current context, it cannot determine whether or not the exception will be caught by the external routine calling Prolog. It will then base its behaviour on the Prolog flag [debug_on_error](flags.html#flag:debug_on_error):

- *current_prolog_flag(debug_on_error, false)*  
  The exception does not trap the debugger and is returned to the foreign routine calling Prolog, where it can be accessed using [PL_exception()](foreigninclude.html#PL_exception()). This is the default.
- *current_prolog_flag(debug_on_error, true)*  
  If the exception is not caught by Prolog in the current context, it will trap the tracer to help analyse the context of the error.

While looking for the context in which an exception takes place, it is advised to switch on debug mode using the predicate [debug/0](debugger.html#debug/0). The hook prolog_exception_hook/5 can be used to add more debugging facilities to exceptions. An example is the library `library(http/http_error)`, generating a full stack trace on errors in the HTTP server library.

### 4.10.4 The exception term

#### 4.10.4.1 General form of the ISO standard exception term

The predicate [throw/1](exception.html#throw/1) takes a single argument, the *exception term*, and the ISO standard stipulates that the exception term be of the form `error(Formal, Context)` with:

- *`Formal`*  
  the‘formal’description of the error, as listed in chapter 7.12.2 pp. 62-63 ("Error classification") of the ISO standard. It indicates the *error class* and possibly relevant *error context* information. It may be a compound term of arity 1,2 or 3 - or simply an atom if there is no relevant error context information.
- *`Context`*  
  additional context information beyond the one in `Formal`. If may be unset, i.e. a fresh variable, or set to something that hopefully will help the programmer in debugging. The structure of `Context` is left unspecified by the ISO Standard, so SWI-Prolog creates it own convention (see below).

Thus, constructing an error term and throwing it might take this form (although you would not use the illustrative explicit naming given here; instead composing the exception term directly in a one-liner):

``` code
Exception = error(Formal, Context),
Context   = ... some local convention ...,
Formal    = type_error(ValidType, Culprit), % for "type error" for example
ValidType = integer,                        % valid atoms are listed in the ISO standard
Culprit   = ... some value ...,
throw(Exception)
```

Note that the ISO standard formal term expresses *what should be the case* or *what is the expected correct state*, and not *what is the problem*. For example:

- If a variable is found to be uninstantiated but should be instantiated, the error term is `instantiation_error`: The problem is not that there is an unwanted instantiation, but that the correct state is the one with an instantiated variable.
- In case a variable is found to be instantiated but should be uninstantiated (because it will be used for output), the error term is `uninstantiation_error(Culprit)`: The problem is not that there is lack of instantiation, but that the correct state is the one which `Culprit` (or one of its subterms) is more uninstantiated than is the case.
- If you try to disassemble an empty list with [compound_name_arguments/3](manipterm.html#compound_name_arguments/3), the error term is `type_error(compound,[])`. The problem is not that `[]` is (erroneously) a compound term, but that a compound term is expected and `[]` does not belong to that class.

#### 4.10.4.2 Throwing exceptions from applications and libraries

User predicates are free to choose the structure of their *exception term*s (i.e., they can define their own conventions) but *should* adhere to the ISO standard if possible, in particular for libraries.

Notably, exceptions of the shape `error(Formal,Context)` are recognised by the development tools and therefore expressing unexpected situations using these exceptions improves the debugging experience.

In SWI-Prolog, the second argument of the exception term, i.e., the `Context` argument, is generally of the form `context(Location, Message)`, where:

- *`Location`*  
  describes the execution context in which the exception occurred. While the `Location` argument may be specified as a predicate indicator (`Name`/`Arity`), it is typically filled by the `library(prolog_stack)` library. This library recognises uncaught errors or errors caught by [catch_with_backtrace/3](exception.html#catch_with_backtrace/3) and fills the `Location` argument with a *backtrace*.
- *`Message`*  
  provides an additional description of the error or can be left as a fresh variable if there is nothing appropriate to fill in.

ISO standard exceptions can be thrown via the predicates exported from `library(error)`. Termwise, these predicates look exactly like the `Formal` of the ISO standard error term they throw:

- [instantiation_error/1](error.html#instantiation_error/1) (the argument is not used: ISO specifies no argument)
- [uninstantiation_error/1](error.html#uninstantiation_error/1)
- [type_error/2](error.html#type_error/2)
- [domain_error/2](error.html#domain_error/2)
- [existence_error/2](error.html#existence_error/2)
- [existence_error/3](error.html#existence_error/3) (a SWI-Prolog extension that is not ISO)
- [permission_error/3](error.html#permission_error/3)
- [representation_error/1](error.html#representation_error/1)
- [resource_error/1](error.html#resource_error/1)
- [syntax_error/1](error.html#syntax_error/1)
