
## 5.2 The string type and its double quoted syntax

As of SWI-Prolog version 7, text enclosed in double quotes (e.g., `"Hello world"`) is read as objects of the type *string*. Strings are distinct from lists, which makes it possible to recognize them at runtime and print them using the string syntax:

``` code
?- write("Hello world!").
Hello world!

?- writeq("Hello world!").
"Hello world!"
```

A string is a compact representation of a character sequence that lives on the global (term) stack. Strings are represented by sequences of Unicode character codes including the character code 0 (zero). The length of strings is limited by the available space on the global (term) stack (see [set_prolog_stack/2](memory.html#set_prolog_stack/2)). [Section 5.2.3](string.html#sec:5.2.3) motivates the introduction of strings and mapping double quoted text to this type.

Whereas in version 7, double-quoted text is mapped to strings, *back-quoted* text (as in `` `text` ``) is mapped to a list of *character codes*, i.e. integers that are Unicode code points. In a traditional setting, back-quoted would be mapped to a list of *characters* (also known as *chars*), which are atoms of length 1.

The settings for the flags that control how double- and back-quoted text is read is summarised in [table 8](string.html#tab:quote-mapping). Programs that aim for compatibility should realise that the ISO standard defines back-quoted text, but does not define the [back_quotes](flags.html#flag:back_quotes) Prolog flag and does not define the term that is produced by back-quoted text.

|  |  |  |
|----|:--:|:--:|
| **Mode** | [double_quotes](flags.html#flag:double_quotes) | [back_quotes](flags.html#flag:back_quotes) |
| Version 7 default | string | codes |
| **--traditional** | codes | symbol_char |

**Table 8 :** Mapping of double and back quoted text in the two modes.

### 5.2.1 Representing text: strings, atoms and code lists

With the introduction of strings as a Prolog data type, there are three main ways to represent text: using strings, using atoms and using lists of character codes. As a fourth way, one may also use lists of chars. This section explains what to choose for what purpose. Both strings and atoms are *atomic* objects: you can only look inside them using dedicated predicates, while lists of character codes or chars are compound data structures forming an extended structure that must follow a convention.

**Lists of character codes**  
is what you need if you want to *parse* text using Prolog grammar rules (DCGs, see [phrase/3](DCG.html#phrase/3)). Most of the text reading predicates (e.g., [read_line_to_codes/2](readutil.html#read_line_to_codes/2)) return a list of character codes because most applications need to parse these lines before the data can be processed. As said above, the *back-quoted text* notation (`` `hello` ``) can be used to easily specify a list of character codes. The `0'c` notation can be used to specify a single character code.

**Atoms**  
are *identifiers*. They are typically used in cases where identity comparison is the main operation and that are typically not composed nor taken apart. Examples are RDF resources (URIs that identify something), system identifiers (e.g., `'Boeing 747'`), but also individual words in a natural language processing system. They are also used where other languages would use *enumerated types*, such as the names of days in the week. Unlike enumerated types, Prolog atoms do not form a fixed set and the same atom can represent different things in different contexts.

**Strings**  
typically represents text that is processed as a unit most of the time, but which is not an identifier for something. Format specifications for [format/3](format.html#format/3) is a good example. Another example is a descriptive text provided in an application. Strings may be composed and decomposed using e.g., [string_concat/3](string.html#string_concat/3) and [sub_string/5](string.html#sub_string/5) or converted for parsing using [string_codes/2](string.html#string_codes/2) or created from codes generated by a generative grammar rule, also using [string_codes/2](string.html#string_codes/2).

### 5.2.2 Predicates that operate on strings

Strings are manipulated using a set of predicates that mirrors the set of predicates used for manipulating atoms. In addition to the list below, [string/1](typetest.html#string/1) performs the type check for this type and is described in [section 4.5](typetest.html#sec:4.5).

SWI-Prolog's string primitives are being synchronized with [ECLiPSe](http://eclipseclp.org/wiki/Prolog/Strings). We expect the set of predicates documented in this section to be stable, although it might be expanded. In general, SWI-Prolog's text manipulation predicates accept any form of text as input argument - they accept *anytext* input. *anytext* comprises:

- atoms
- strings
- lists of *character codes*
- list of *characters*
- number types: integers, floating point numbers and non-integer rationals. Under the hood, these must first be formatted into a text representation according to some inner convention before they can be used.

The predicates produce the type indicated by the predicate name as output. This policy simplifies migration and writing programs that can run unmodified or with minor modifications on systems that do not support strings. Code should avoid relying on this feature as much as possible for clarity as well as to facilitate a more strict mode and/or type checking in future releases.

**atom_string**(`?Atom, ?String`)  
Bi-directional conversion between an atom and a string. At least one of the two arguments must be instantiated. An initially uninstantiated variable on the “string side” is always instantiated to a string. An initially uninstantiated variable on the “atom side” is always instantiated to an atom. If both arguments are instantiated, their list-of-character representations must match, but the types are not enforced. The following all succeed:

``` code
atom_string("x",'x').
atom_string('x',"x").
atom_string(3.1415,3.1415).
atom_string('3r2',3r2).
atom_string(3r2,'3r2').
atom_string(6r4,3r2).
```

**number_string**(`?Number, ?String`)  
Bi-directional conversion between a number and a string. At least one of the two arguments must be instantiated. Besides the type used to represent the text, this predicate differs in several ways from its ISO cousin:^(170Note that SWI-Prolog's syntax for numbers is not ISO compatible either.)

- If `String` does not represent a number, the predicate *fails* rather than throwing a syntax error exception.
- Leading white space and Prolog comments are *not* allowed.
- Numbers may start with `+` or `-`.
- It is *not* allowed to have white space between a leading `+` or `-` and the number.
- Floating point numbers in exponential notation do not require a dot before exponent, i.e., `"1e10"` is a valid number.

Unlike other predicates of this family, if instantiated, `String` cannot be an atom.

The corresponding‘atom-handling’predicate is [atom_number/2](manipatom.html#atom_number/2), with reversed argument order.

**term_string**(`?Term, ?String`)  
Bi-directional conversion between a term and a string. If `String` is instantiated, it is parsed and the result is unified with `Term`. Otherwise `Term` is‘written’using the option `quoted(true)` and the result is converted to `String`. If `String` only contains white space and/or comments, an `syntax_error(end_of_string)` exception is raised.

**term_string**(`?Term, ?String, +Options`)  
As [term_string/2](string.html#term_string/2), passing `Options` to either [read_term/2](termrw.html#read_term/2) or [write_term/2](termrw.html#write_term/2). For example:

``` code
?- term_string(Term, 'a(A)', [variable_names(VNames)]).
Term = a(_9674),
VNames = ['A'=_9674].
```

**string_chars**(`?String, ?Chars`)  
Bi-directional conversion between a string and a list of characters. At least one of the two arguments must be instantiated.

See also: [atom_chars/2](manipatom.html#atom_chars/2).

**string_codes**(`?String, ?Codes`)  
Bi-directional conversion between a string and a list of character codes. At least one of the two arguments must be instantiated.

**string_bytes**(`?String, ?Bytes, +Encoding`)  
True when the (Unicode) `String` is represented by `Bytes` in `Encoding`. If `String` is instantiated it may represent text as an atom, string, list of character codes or list or characters. `Bytes` is always a list of integers in the range `0 ... 255`. At least one of `String` or `Bytes` must be instantiated. This predicate is notably intended as an intermediate step to perform byte oriented operations on text. Examples are (base64) encoding, encryption, computing a (secure) hash, etc. `Encoding` is typically `utf8`. All valid stream encodings except for `wchar_t` are supported. See [section 2.18.1](widechars.html#sec:2.18.1). Note that this translation is only provided for strings. Creating an atom from bytes requires [atom_string/2](string.html#atom_string/2).^(171Strings are an efficient intermediate and this conversion is needed only in some uncommon scenarios.)

\[det\]**text_to_string**(`+Text, -String`)  
Converts `Text` to a string. `Text` is *anytext* excluding the number types. When running in **--traditional** mode, `'[]'` is ambiguous and interpreted as an empty string.

**string_length**(`+String, -Length`)  
Unify `Length` with the number of characters in `String`. This predicate is functionally equivalent to [atom_length/2](manipatom.html#atom_length/2) and also accepts *anytext* as its first argument. Numeric types are formatted into strings before the length of their string representation is determined.^(172This behavior should be considered deprecated) See also [write_length/3](termrw.html#write_length/3).

**string_code**(`?Index, +String, ?Code`)  
True when `Code` represents the character at the 1-based `Index` position in `String`. If `Index` is unbound the string is scanned from index 1. Raises a domain error if `Index` is negative. Fails silently if `Index` is zero or greater than the length of `String`. The mode `string_code(-,+,+)` is deterministic if the searched-for `Code` appears only once in `String`. See also [sub_string/5](string.html#sub_string/5).

**get_string_code**(`+Index, +String, -Code`)  
Semi-deterministic version of [string_code/3](string.html#string_code/3). In addition, this version provides strict range checking, throwing a domain error if `Index` is less than 1 or greater than the length of `String`. ECLiPSe provides this to support `String[Index]` notation.

**string_concat**(`?String1, ?String2, ?String3`)  
Similar to [atom_concat/3](manipatom.html#atom_concat/3), but the unbound argument will be unified with a string object rather than an atom. Also, if both `String1` and `String2` are unbound and `String3` is bound to text, it breaks `String3`, unifying the start with `String1` and the end with `String2` as append does with lists. Note that this is not particularly fast on long strings, as for each redo the system has to create two entirely new strings, while the list equivalent only creates a single new list-cell and moves some pointers around.

\[det\]**split_string**(`+String, +SepChars, +PadChars, -SubStrings`)  
Break `String` into `SubStrings`. The `SepChars` argument provides the characters that act as separators and thus the length of `SubStrings` is one more than the number of separators found if `SepChars` and `PadChars` do not have common characters. If `SepChars` and `PadChars` are equal, sequences of adjacent separators act as a single separator. Leading and trailing characters for each substring that appear in `PadChars` are removed from the substring. The input arguments can be either atoms, strings or char/code lists. Compatible with ECLiPSe. Below are some examples:

A simple split wherever there is a‘.’:

``` code
?- split_string("a.b.c.d", ".", "", L).
L = ["a", "b", "c", "d"].
```

Consider sequences of separators as a single one:

``` code
?- split_string("/home//jan///nice/path", "/", "/", L).
L = ["home", "jan", "nice", "path"].
```

Split and remove white space:

``` code
?- split_string("SWI-Prolog, 7.0", ",", " ", L).
L = ["SWI-Prolog", "7.0"].
```

Only remove leading and trailing white space (*trim* the string):

``` code
?- split_string("  SWI-Prolog  ", "", "\s\t\n", L).
L = ["SWI-Prolog"].
```

In the typical use cases, `SepChars` either does not overlap `PadChars` or is equivalent to handle multiple adjacent separators as a single (often white space). The behaviour with partially overlapping sets of padding and separators should be considered undefined. See also [read_string/5](string.html#read_string/5).

**sub_string**(`+String, ?Before, ?Length, ?After, ?SubString`)  
This predicate is functionally equivalent to [sub_atom/5](manipatom.html#sub_atom/5), but operates on strings. Note that this implies the string *input* arguments can be either strings or atoms. If `SubString` is unbound (output) it is unified with a string. The following example splits a string of the form \<`name`\>=\<`value`\> into the name part (an atom) and the value (a string).

``` code
name_value(String, Name, Value) :-
    sub_string(String, Before, _, After, "="),
    !,
    sub_atom(String, 0, Before, _, Name),
    sub_string(String, _, After, 0, Value).
```

The next example defines a predicate that inserts a value at a position. See [sub_atom/5](manipatom.html#sub_atom/5) for more examples.

``` code
string_insert(Str, Val, At, NewStr) :-
    sub_string(Str, 0, At, A1, S1),
    sub_string(Str, At, A1, _, S2),
    atomics_to_string([S1,Val,S2], NewStr).
```

**atomics_to_string**(`+List, -String`)  
`List` is a list of strings, atoms, or number types. Succeeds if `String` can be unified with the concatenated elements of `List`. Equivalent to `atomics_to_string(List,’’, String)`.

**atomics_to_string**(`+List, +Separator, -String`)  
Creates a string just like [atomics_to_string/2](string.html#atomics_to_string/2), but inserts `Separator` between each pair of inputs. For example:

``` code
?- atomics_to_string([gnu, "gnat", 1], ', ', A).
A = "gnu, gnat, 1"
```

**string_upper**(`+String, -UpperCase`)  
Convert `String` to upper case and unify the result with `UpperCase`.

**string_lower**(`+String, LowerCase`)  
Convert `String` to lower case and unify the result with `LowerCase`.

**read_string**(`+Stream, ?Length, -String`)  
Read at most `Length` characters from `Stream` and return them in the string `String`. If `Length` is unbound, `Stream` is read to the end and `Length` is unified with the number of characters read. The number of *bytes* read depends on the encoding of `Stream` (see [section 2.18.1](widechars.html#sec:2.18.1)). This predicate may be used to read a sequence of bytes when the stream is in `octet` encoding. See [open/4](IO.html#open/4) and [set_stream/2](IO.html#set_stream/2) for controlling the encoding.

**read_string**(`+Stream, +SepChars, +PadChars, -Sep, -String`)  
Read a string from `Stream`, providing functionality similar to [split_string/4](string.html#split_string/4). The predicate performs the following steps:

1.  Skip all characters that match `PadChars`
2.  Read up to a character that matches `SepChars` or end of file
3.  Discard trailing characters that match `PadChars` from the collected input
4.  Unify `String` with a string created from the input and `Sep` with the code of the separator character read. If input was terminated by the end of the input, `Sep` is unified with -1.

The predicate [read_string/5](string.html#read_string/5) called repeatedly on an input until `Sep` is -1 (end of file) is equivalent to reading the entire file into a string and calling [split_string/4](string.html#split_string/4), provided that `SepChars` and `PadChars` are not *partially overlapping*.^(173Behaviour that is fully compatible would require unlimited look-ahead.) Below are some examples:

Read a line:

``` code
read_string(Input, "\n", "\r", Sep, String)
```

Read a line, stripping leading and trailing white space:

``` code
read_string(Input, "\n", "\r\t ", Sep, String)
```

Read up to‘`,`’or‘`)`’, unifying `Sep` with `0',` i.e. Unicode 44, or `0')`, i.e. Unicode 41:

``` code
read_string(Input, ",)", "\t ", Sep, String)
```

**open_string**(`+String, -Stream`)  
True when `Stream` is an input stream that accesses the content of `String`. `String` can be any text representation, i.e., string, atom, list of codes or list of characters. The created `Stream` has the `reposition` property (see [stream_property/2](IO.html#stream_property/2)). Note that the internal encoding of the data is either ISO Latin 1 or UTF-8.

### 5.2.3 Why has the representation of double quoted text changed?

Prolog defines two forms of quoted text. Traditionally, single quoted text is mapped to atoms while double quoted text is mapped to a list of *character codes* (integers) or characters (atoms of length 1). Representing text using atoms is often considered inadequate for several reasons:

- It hides the conceptual difference between text and program symbols. Where content of text often matters because it is used in I/O, program symbols are merely identifiers that match with the same symbol elsewhere. Program symbols can often be consistently replaced, for example to obfuscate or compact a program.
- Atoms are globally unique identifiers. They are stored in a shared table. Volatile strings represented as atoms come at a significant price due to the required cooperation between threads for creating atoms. Reclaiming temporary atoms using *Atom garbage collection* is a costly process that requires significant synchronisation.
- Many Prolog systems (not SWI-Prolog) put severe restrictions on the length of atoms or the maximum number of atoms.

Representing text as lists, be it of character codes or characters, also comes at a price:

- It is not possible to distinguish (at runtime) a list of integers or atoms from a string. Sometimes this information can be derived from (implicit) typing. In other cases the list must be embedded in a compound term to distinguish the two types. For example, `s("hello world")` could be used to indicate that we are dealing with a string.

  Lacking runtime information, debuggers and the toplevel can only use heuristics to decide whether to print a list of integers as such or as a string (see [portray_text/1](portraytext.html#portray_text/1)).

  While experienced Prolog programmers have learned to cope with this, we still consider this an unfortunate situation.

- Lists are expensive structures, taking 2 cells per character (3 for SWI-Prolog in its current form). This stresses memory consumption on the stacks while pushing them on the stack and dealing with them during garbage collection is unnecessarily expensive.

### 5.2.4 Adapting code for double quoted strings

We observe that in many programs, most strings are only handled as a single unit during their lifetime. Examining real code tells us that double quoted strings typically appear in one of the following roles:

**A DCG literal**  
Although represented as a list of codes is the correct representation for handling in DCGs, the DCG translator can recognise the literal and convert it to the proper representation. Such code need not be modified.

**A format string**  
This is a typical example of text that is conceptually not a program identifier. Format is designed to deal with alternative representations of the format string. Such code need not be modified.

**Getting a character code**  
The construct `[X] = "a"` is a commonly used template for getting the character code of the letter’a’. ISO Prolog defines the syntax `0'a` for this purpose. Code using this must be modified. The modified code will run on any ISO compliant Prolog Processor.

**As argument to list predicates to operate on strings**  
Here, we might see code similar to `append("name:", Rest, Codes)`. Such code needs to be modified. In this particular example, the following is a good portable alternative: `phrase("name:", Codes, Rest)`

**Checks for a character to be in a set**  
Such tests are often performed with code such as this: `memberchk(C, "~!@#$")`. This is a rather inefficient check in a traditional Prolog system because it pushes a list of character codes cell-by-cell onto the Prolog stack and then traverses this list cell-by-cell to see whether one of the cells unifies with `C`. If the test is successful, the string will eventually be subject to garbage collection. The best code for this is to write a predicate as below, which pushes nothing on the stack and performs an indexed lookup to see whether the character code is in‘my_class’.

``` code
my_class(0'~).
my_class(0'!).
...
```

An alternative to reach the same effect is to use term expansion to create the clauses:

``` code
term_expansion(my_class(_), Clauses) :-
        findall(my_class(C),
                string_code(_, "~!@#$", C),
                Clauses).

my_class(_).
```

Finally, the predicate [string_code/3](string.html#string_code/3) can be exploited directly as a replacement for the [memberchk/2](builtinlist.html#memberchk/2) on a list of codes. Although the string is still pushed onto the stack, it is more compact and only a single entity.

### 5.2.5 Predicates to support adapting code for double quoted strings

The predicates in this section can help adapting your program to the new convention for handling double quoted strings. We have adapted a huge code base with which we were not familiar in about half a day.

**list_strings**  
This predicate may be used to assess compatibility issues due to the representation of double quoted text as string objects. See [section 5.2](string.html#sec:5.2) and [section 5.2.3](string.html#sec:5.2.3). To use it, load your program into Prolog and run [list_strings/0](string.html#list_strings/0). The predicate lists source locations of string objects encountered in the program that are not considered safe. Such string need to be examined manually, after which one of the actions below may be appropriate:

- Rewrite the code. For example, change `[X] = "a"` into `X = 0'a`.

- If a particular module relies heavily on representing strings as lists of character code, consider adding the following directive to the module. Note that this flag only applies to the module in which it appears.

  ``` code
            :- set_prolog_flag(double_quotes, codes).
            
  ```

- Use a back quoted string (e.g., `` `text` ``). Note that this will not make your code run regardless of the **--traditional** command line option and code exploiting this mapping is also not portable to ISO compliant systems.

- If the strings appear in facts and usage is safe, add a clause to the multifile predicate [check:string_predicate/1](string.html#check:string_predicate/1) to silence [list_strings/0](string.html#list_strings/0) on all clauses of that predicate.

- If the strings appear as an argument to a predicate that can handle string objects, add a clause to the multifile predicate [check:valid_string_goal/1](string.html#check:valid_string_goal/1) to silence [list_strings/0](string.html#list_strings/0).

**check:string_predicate**(`:PredicateIndicator`)  
Declare that `PredicateIndicator` has clauses that contain strings, but that this is safe. For example, if there is a predicate help_info/2 , where the second argument contains a double quoted string that is handled properly by the predicates of the applications’help system, add the following declaration to stop [list_strings/0](string.html#list_strings/0) from complaining:

``` code
:- multifile check:string_predicate/1.

check:string_predicate(user:help_info/2).
```

**check:valid_string_goal**(`:Goal`)  
Declare that calls to `Goal` are safe. The module qualification is the actual module in which `Goal` is defined. For example, a call to [format/3](format.html#format/3) is resolved by the predicate system:format/3. and the code below specifies that the second argument may be a string (system predicates that accept strings are defined in the library).

``` code
:- multifile check:valid_string_goal/1.

check:valid_string_goal(system:format(_,S,_)) :- string(S).
```
